>> Reporter: THE RETRAINING
OF SEATTLE'S POLICE DEPARTMENT
WAS SPARKED BY THIS FATAL
POLICE-INVOLVED SHOOTING IN
2010.
JOHN T. WILLIAMS, A NATIVE
AMERICAN WOODCARVER, SEEN IN
THIS PATROL CAR VIDEO CROSSING
THE STREET, WAS ORDERED TO DROP
A KNIFE HE WAS CARRYING FOR HIS
CRAFT.
POLICE OFFICER IAN BIRK GAVE
WILLIAMS, WHO WAS HARD OF
HEARING, JUST FOUR SECONDS
WARNING BEFORE OPENING FIRE.
>> PUT THE KNIFE DOWN!
(GUNSHOTS)
>> Reporter: IT WAS THE EIGHTH
FATAL POLICE-INVOLVED SHOOTING
BY SEATTLE POLICE IN FIVE YEARS,
AND THE 25th IN A DECADE.
BIRK RESIGNED FROM THE FORCE BUT
WAS NOT PROSECUTED.
THE U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
LAUNCHED AN INVESTIGATION.
IT FOUND THAT SEATTLE POLICE HAD
ENGAGED IN A "PATTERN OR
PRACTICE OF USING UNNECESSARY OR
EXCESSIVE FORCE," AND RAISED
"SERIOUS CONCERNS ABOUT BIASED
POLICING."
IN 2012, THE CITY OF SEATTLE
SETTLED THE PROBE WITH A CONSENT
DECREE, AGREEING TO COURT-
MONITORED REFORMS TO MINIMIZE
USE-OF-FORCE INCIDENTS NOT ONLY
WITH GUNS BUT WITH TASERS AND
BATONS.
FOR THE PAST FIVE YEARS, SEATTLE
POLICE OFFICERS HAVE RETRAINED
HOW TO APPROACH SOMEONE IN
CRISIS OR SHOWING SIGNS OF
MENTAL ILLNESS.
IN THIS SCENARIO, THEY'RE TRYING
TO STOP A MAN FROM RUNNING
THROUGH TRAFFIC.
>> SIR, OFFICER STEVENS, SEATTLE
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
WHAT'S YOUR NAME?
>> Reporter: AT TIMES, IT SOUNDS
MORE LIKE A PSYCHOLOGY CLASS.
>> THIS IS JUST TOO MUCH.
>> HEY, BROTHER, IT SOUNDS LIKE
YOU'RE INCREDIBLY OVERWHELMED.
I THINK JOB LOSS IS TOUGH FOR
ALL OF US.
>> Reporter: THE GOAL HERE IS TO
DE-ESCALATE THE SITUATION.
>> YOU GOT TO ANALYZE IT FROM
BOTH SIDES.
>> Reporter: TRAINER ANDREW
MARVEL SAYS SLOWING THINGS DOWN
REDUCES THE CHANCES OF A VIOLENT
ENCOUNTER.
>> IF WE HAVE SITUATIONS THAT
POTENTIALLY COULD GO BAD AND
COULD POTENTIALLY RESULT IN SOME
TYPE OF LETHAL FORCE BEING USED,
IF OUR OFFICERS CAN RECOGNIZE
THAT AHEAD OF TIME, THOSE
SITUATIONS, USE GOOD TACTICS,
USE GOOD VERBAL SKILLS, AND
INCORPORATE SOME TEAMWORK IN
THERE, WE END UP REDUCING THOSE
SITUATIONS.
>> Reporter: ALL SEATTLE
POLICE OFFICERS ARE REQUIRED TO
TAKE THIS FOUR-HOUR CRISIS
INTERVENTION TRAINING ONCE A
YEAR.
THAT'S ON TOP OF AN EIGHT-HOUR
COURSE NOW MANDATED FOR ALL
ROOKIE OFFICERS IN WASHINGTON
STATE.
SOME SEATTLE OFFICERS VOLUNTEER
FOR AN EXTRA 40-HOUR COURSE TO
JOIN SPECIAL CRISIS INTERVENTION
TEAMS DISPATCHED IN THESE TYPES
OF SITUATIONS.
>> YOU GUYS DON'T EVEN KNOW
WHAT'S GOING ON.
>> I'LL FEEL MORE COMFORTABLE IF
WE CAN TALK WITHOUT YOU HOLDING
THE KNIFE, BECAUSE IT IS A
LITTLE SCARY.
>> HERE, WE TYPICALLY DISPLAY
INFORMATION ABOUT UNITS THAT ARE
ON PATROL, WHAT'S HAPPENING...
>> Reporter: THE SEATTLE POLICE
DEPARTMENT'S CHIEF OPERATING
OFFICER, BRIAN MAXEY, SAYS
BETTER DATA COLLECTION ABOUT
POLICE ENCOUNTERS SHOWS THE
TRAINING IS WORKING.
>> WHAT WE'RE FINDING OUT IS
THAT, WITH THE 10,000 CONTACTS
WE HAVE WITH PEOPLE IN SEVERE
CRISIS EVERY YEAR, OFFICERS ARE
ONLY USING FORCE 1.6% OF THE
TIME.
THAT IS REMARKABLY LOW BECAUSE
THIS IS THE MOST VOLATILE
POPULATION THAT OFFICERS ENGAGE
WITH.
OF THAT 1.6%, ONLY ABOUT HALF OF
THAT IS ANY KIND OF SERIOUS USE
OF FORCE.
>> Reporter: THIS APRIL, THE
COURT-APPOINTED MONITOR
OVERSEEING SEATTLE'S CONSENT
DECREE FOUND A 60% REDUCTION IN
USE OF FORCE BY POLICE BETWEEN
2014 AND 2016.
JUST A WEEK BEFORE THAT REPORT,
ATTORNEY GENERAL JEFF SESSIONS
ORDERED A REVIEW OF ALL OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION CONSENT DECREES,
WHICH HE SAYS VILIFY POLICE AND
REDUCE THEIR MORALE.
>> FOR SEATTLE, SESSIONS' THREAT
IS AN EMPTY THREAT.
>> Reporter: SEATTLE'S
DEMOCRATIC MAYOR, ED MURRAY,
SAYS FEDERAL OVERSIGHT HAS BEEN
ESSENTIAL.
>> THE IDEA THAT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT WOULD STEP BACK FROM
BEING A... BASICALLY AN HONEST
BROKER BETWEEN COMMUNITIES OF
COLOR AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS IN
CITIES HAS THE POTENTIAL TO BE
EXPLOSIVE.
THIS IS A ROLE THAT THEY'VE
PLAYED SINCE THE 1960s, AND I
THINK THAT OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT
TODAY IS A BETTER POLICE
DEPARTMENT BECAUSE THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT CAME IN, BECAUSE THE
FEDERAL MONITOR WAS APPOINTED.
>> SO, IF OTHER COMMISSIONERS
COULD COME TOMORROW MORNING...
>> Reporter: SEATTLE'S CONSENT
DECREE ALSO CREATED A COMMUNITY
POLICE COMMISSION TO ADVISE THE
COURT ON PROGRESS IMPLEMENTING
REFORMS.
THE TRUST SEATTLE POLICE HAVE
BEEN TRYING TO BUILD WAS SHAKEN
LAST MONTH BY THE DEATH OF
CHARLEENA LYLES.
ACCORDING TO HER FAMILY, THE
30-YEAR-OLD BLACK SINGLE MOTHER
HAD A HISTORY OF MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUES.
ON SUNDAY MORNING, JUNE 18,
LYLES CALLED 911 TO REPORT A
BURGLARY.
WHEN TWO WHITE SEATTLE POLICE
OFFICERS ARRIVED AT HER
APARTMENT, THE CONVERSATION AT
FIRST WAS CALM, AS YOU CAN HEAR
IN THIS POLICE RECORDING.
>>SOMEONE BROKE INTO MY HOUSE
AND TOOK MY THINGS.
>> Reporter: THE SITUATION
DETERIORATED RAPIDLY WHEN LYLES
ALLEGEDLY BRANDISHED TWO KITCHEN
KNIVES.
>>HEY, GET BACK.
>>TAZE HER.
>>I DON'T HAVE A TASER.
>>WE NEED HELP.
WE'VE GOT A WOMAN WITH TWO
KNIVES.
>>HEY, GET BACK.
>>GET BACK.
(GUNSHOTS)
>> Reporter: WITH THREE OF HER
FOUR CHILDREN IN THE NEXT ROOM,
BOTH OFFICERS FIRED THEIR GUNS,
HITTING LYLES SEVEN TIMES.
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT SAYS
NEITHER HAD A TASER, BUT THEY
WERE CARRYING EITHER A BATON OR
PEPPER SPRAY, AND BOTH HAD
UNDERGONE CRISIS INTERVENTION
TRAINING.
>> CHARLEENA!
>> WHAT'S HER NAME?
>> Reporter: THOUGH THE
INVESTIGATION INTO LYLES' DEATH
HAS JUST BEGUN, THE OUTRAGE HAS
BEEN IMMEDIATE.
>> WE WILL STAND UP, ONE AND
UNITED, TO PRESSURE THIS CITY TO
CHANGE ITS BEHAVIOR IN POLICING.
>> Reporter: FOR COMMUNITY
ACTIVIST ANDRE TAYLOR, THIS
PROTEST WAS ALL TOO FAMILIAR.
LAST YEAR, SEATTLE POLICE SHOT
AND KILLED HIS BROTHER, CHE,
WHOM THEY HAD SUSPECTED OF
ILLEGALLY POSSESSING A FIREARM.
POLICE DASH CAM VIDEO SHOWS
THREE WHITE OFFICERS APPROACHING
HIS VEHICLE.
CHE WAS FACING THE OPEN
PASSENGER DOOR.
THE OFFICERS ORDERED HIM TO PUT
HIS HANDS UP, THEN THEY SHOT
HIM.
>> HANDS UP!
(GUNSHOTS)
SHOTS FIRED.
>> Reporter: 18 MONTHS LATER,
THE SHOCK OF THE INCIDENT HAS
NOT LESSENED FOR ANDRE TAYLOR AS
HE SHOWED US AROUND THE SOUTH
SEATTLE NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE HE
GREW UP.
>> IT WASN'T EVEN A MATTER OF
SECONDS BEFORE THEY KILLED HIM.
IT WAS... IT WAS... IT WAS
DEVASTATING, AS SOME OF THE
OTHER SHOOTINGS I'VE SEEN.
>> Reporter: TAYLOR SAYS DESPITE
REFORMS, DISTRUST OF POLICE
REMAINS ENDEMIC IN THE CITY'S
AFRICAN-AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
HE INTRODUCED US TO A GROUP
GATHERED AT A COMMUNITY CENTER,
COMMISERATING OVER THEIR
INTERACTIONS WITH POLICE.
17-YEAR-OLD JAHILA MOODY SAYS
SHE OFTEN GETS STOPPED BY THE
POLICE.
>> YOU DON'T EVEN HAVE TO HAVE
ANY TYPE OF ALTERCATION WITH THE
POLICE.
YOU COULD JUST BE WALKING DOWN
THE STREET, AND THEY'LL PULL UP
ON YOU, AND THEY'LL BE LIKE,
"WHAT ARE YOU DOING?"
A LOT OF THE TIME, POLICE FEEL
THREATENED BY US BECAUSE THEY
ARE SCARED, NOT BECAUSE WE ARE
SCARED.
>> Reporter: TAYLOR SAYS ANOTHER
FRUSTRATION IS THE LENIENCY THE
LAW AFFORDS POLICE OFFICERS
INVOLVED IN FATAL SHOOTINGS LIKE
HIS BROTHER'S.
DAN SATTERBERG IS THE
PROSECUTING ATTORNEY WHO DECIDED
NOT TO FILE CHARGES AGAINST
THOSE OFFICERS.
THAT'S BECAUSE POLICE WHO
REASONABLY BELIEVE THEIR LIVES
ARE IN DANGER CANNOT BE
CONVICTED.
THAT'S THE LEGAL STANDARD ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
BUT IN WASHINGTON STATE,
PROSECUTORS MUST ALSO PROVE AN
OFFICER SHOWED MALICE.
>> "MALICE" IS NOT A WORD WE USE
A LOT IN CONVERSATION, BUT IT
MEANS AN EVIL INTENT, A DARK
HEART.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THAT TAPE, THAT
VIDEOTAPE, WHEN YOU TALK TO THE
OFFICERS, LOOK INTO THE
INVESTIGATION, CERTAINLY
QUESTIONS ARISE.
COULD THEY HAVE DONE SOMETHING
DIFFERENT?
COULD THEY HAVE MADE A... A
DECISION STRATEGICALLY,
TACTICALLY, TO INTERCEPT MR.
TAYLOR SOMEWHERE OTHER THAN
RIGHT AT THE DOOR OF THE CAR?
I THINK THAT WAS ORIGINALLY
THEIR PLAN TO DO SO.
AND THEN, WHEN HE DIDN'T WALK
AWAY FROM THE CAR, THEY FELT
THEY WERE ALREADY COMMITTED.
SO, WAS THIS PERFECT?
NO.
COULD IT HAVE BEEN DONE BETTER?
YES.
IS THERE MALICE?
THERE'S NO MALICE IN THERE.
>> IT TURNED OUT CHE TAYLOR WAS
NOT HOLDING A GUN, THOUGH POLICE
SAY THEY LATER FOUND THIS
45-CALIBER PISTOL UNDER THE
VEHICLE'S PASSENGER SEAT.
>> IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE A SET OF
FACTS THAT WOULD MEET THE MALICE
STANDARD; YOU'D ALMOST HAVE TO
HAVE A PERSONAL ANIMOSITY
BETWEEN THE OFFICER AND THE
CIVILIAN THAT PRE-EXISTED THE
MOMENT.
BUT EVEN THEN, WE STILL HAVE TO
PROVE THAT SELF-DEFENSE WAS NOT
A MOTIVATING FACTOR AND THAT THE
OFFICER LACKED ALL GOOD FAITH TO
BELIEVE THAT THAT FORCE WAS
NECESSARY.
>> Reporter: A "SEATTLE TIMES"
INVESTIGATION FOUND, OF 213
POLICE-INVOLVED KILLINGS IN
WASHINGTON STATE BETWEEN 2005
AND 2015, NOT ONE OFFICER HAS
BEEN CONVICTED OF WRONGDOING.
SEATTLE POLICE CRISIS
INTERVENTION TRAINER ANDREW
MARVEL SAYS THE HIGH LEGAL
STANDARD IS JUSTIFIED.
>> OFFICERS DO HAVE A HIGHER
THRESHOLD FOR PROSECUTION THAN
THE AVERAGE CITIZEN, AND THAT'S
BECAUSE WE HAVE OFFICERS BEING
ASKED TO MAKE VERY DIFFICULT
DECISIONS IN A VERY SHORT AMOUNT
OF TIME.
NOBODY WINS IF WE GET IT WRONG,
SO THAT'S WHY WE TRAIN AS MUCH
AS WE DO, AND THAT'S WHY WE GET
THE LEVEL OF PROTECTION THAT WE
DO.
>> Reporter: ANDRE TAYLOR IS NOW
LEADING AN EFFORT TO PASS A
BALLOT INITIATIVE NEXT YEAR
CALLED "DE-ESCALATE WASHINGTON."
IT WOULD AMEND STATE LAW TO
REMOVE THE MALICE THRESHOLD WHEN
TRYING TO HOLD OFFICERS
ACCOUNTABLE IF THEY KILL A
CITIZEN IN THE LINE OF DUTY.
>> WE DEMAND THAT, AS EACH AND
EVERY PERSON HAS A JOB AND HAS
SOMEBODY TO LOOK TO, TO BE
ACCOUNTABLE TO, THAT OFFICERS
MUST ALSO HAVE SOMEONE TO BE
ACCOUNTABLE TO.
IN 30 YEARS IN THIS STATE, THEY
HAVEN'T BEEN ACCOUNTABLE TO
NOBODY.
THAT'S A PROBLEM.